libhugetlbfs HOWTO
==================

Author: David Gibson <dwg@au1.ibm.com>
Last updated: Thursday, 1st December 2005

Prerequisites
-------------

	kernel:

To use hugepage explicitly with the help of libhugetlbfs, any kernel
with hugepages configured in should be sufficient, as long as you use
MAP_SHARED mappings only.

To use MAP_PRIVATE mappings, or to use the automatic malloc()/morecore
feature, or to use the hugepage text/data/bss feature, you will need a
kernel with hugepage COW support.  This is in current -mm, or you can
apply Adam/my patches manually.

The malloc()/morecore features will generate warnings if used on
powerpc with a kernel where hugepage mappings don't respect the hint
address.  The patch to fix this went into paulus PowerPC tree on 24
Nov 2005, and is expected to go into mainline after 2.6.15.  Hugepage
malloc()/morecore should still work without this patch, but the size
of the hugepage heap will be limited (to around 256M for 32-bit and
1TB for 64-bit).

WARNING: In the course of writing this library, I've tracked down and
fixed a number of hugepage related kernel bugs.  The testsuite
contains tests for these bugs, some of which WILL CRASH HARD a kernel
without the relevant fixes, some of which only went into Linus' git
tree 30 Nov 2005.

	binutils:

To use the text/data/bss feature (and indeed to build the testsuite)
you will need a recent binutils.  Specifically it needs to support the
ONLY_IF_RO and ONLY_IF_RW constructs.  The only reason for this is
that the hugepage linker scripts are based on recent versions of the
standard linker scripts which include these constructs.  I'm hoping to
be able to relax this requirement, but I haven't gotten around to it
yet.

Building the library
--------------------

Type "make".  Optionally you can (manually) copy the 32 and 64 bit
versions of the library (obj32/libhugetlbfs.so and
obj64/libhugetlbfs.so) somewhere more useful.  Alternatively you can
just point back at the wherever you built the library when you build
an program using it.

For good measure you can run through the testsuite with "make check",
however note the WARNING under Prerequisites above.


Using hugepage malloc() / morecore
----------------------------------

To run an program using the automatic hugepage malloc()/morecore
feature, you must set two environment variables.  First set
"LD_PRELOAD" to the full path to the libhugetlbfs.so as built above
(make sure to get either the 32 or 64 bit version as appropriate to
your program).  This tells the dynamic linker to load libhugetlbfs
even though the program wasn't linked against it.  Second set the
environment variable "HUGETLB_MORECORE" to anything.  This tells the
library to override libc's normal morecore() function with a hugepage
version and use it for malloc().  From this point all malloc()s should
come from hugepage memory until it runs out.

e.g. if you have built libhugetlbfs in ~/libhugetlbfs, the following
would work for a 64-bit program:

	export LD_PRELOAD=~/libhugetlbfs/obj64/libhugetlbfs.so
	HUGETLB_MORECORE=yes <your app command line>

Under some circumstances you may wish to specify the address at which
the hugepage heap is located.  This can be done by setting the
environment variable HUGETLB_MORECORE_HEAPBASE to the heap address in
hex.  Note that this will not be effective on powerpc systems without
the kernel patch to make hugepage hint addresses be respected (see
Prerequisites, above).  By default the hugepage heap begins at roughly
the same place a normal page heap would, rounded up by some amount.
On ppc32 the normal page heap address is rounded up to a multiple of
256M (i.e. putting it in the next MMU segment), on ppc64 the address
is rounded up to a multiple of 1TB, and on all other platforms the
address is rounded up to the size of a hugepage.

Using hugepage text/data/bss
----------------------------

	Linking the app:

To place an app's text, data and/or bss into hugepages you need to
re-link it using one of the special linker scripts in the ldscripts/
directory of libhugetlbfs.  To do this use
	ld -T <path to script> <other link arguments>
OR
	cc -Wl,-T <patch to script> <other link arguments>

The "other link arguments" should be whatever you'd normally pass to
the linker when linking your app.  The libhugetlbfs linker scripts, as
well as rearranging the sections and segments automatically link in
the libhugetlbfs library, so you may need to add in a -L<path> option
to give the directory of the libhugetlbfs.so file.

	Which script to use:

All the scripts have names of the for <platform>.<linktype>.  The
platforms are:
	elf32ppclinux		- Use for 32-bit apps on PowerPC
	elf64ppc		- Use for 64-bit apps on PowerPC
	elf_i386		- Use for 32-bit apps on x86

The link types are:
	xB			- puts BSS into hugepages
	xBDT			- puts text, static data and BSS into hugepages

	Running the app:

The specially linked app needs libhugetlbfs, so you may need to set
LD_LIBRARY_PATH so that it can locate libhugetlbfs.so.  Other than
that, once the app is linked with the correct script, it should only
be necessary to run it normally to activate the text/data/bss hugepage
feature.  Upon initialisation libhugetlbfs will detect the special
flags in the app's ELF header and remap the requested program segments
into hugepages.

Troubleshooting
---------------

The library has a certain amount of debugging code built in, which can
be controlled with the environment variable HUGETLB_VERBOSE.  By
default the debug level is "1" which means the library will only print
relatively serious error messages.  Setting HUGETLB_VERBOSE=2 or
higher will enable more debug messages (at present 2 is the highest
debug level, but that may change).  Setting HUGETLB_VERBOSE=0 will
silence the library completely, even in the case of errors - the only
exception is in cases where the library has to abort(), which can
happen if something goes wrong in the middle of unmapping and
remapping segments for the text/data/bss feature.

